docs: add explanation for the fix plan API (#2699)
canonical/ubuntu-pro-client: docs/explanations/how_to_interpret_output_of_fix_plan_api.md

# How to interpret the output of fix plan API endpoint

On the Pro Client version 29, we introduced two distinct endpoints:

* `u.pro.security.fix.cve.plan.v1`
* `u.pro.security.fix.usn.plan.v1`

> Those endpoints can be used to verify the necessary steps for fixing a list of CVEs/USNs.

Reviewer: Let's also add a link back to the CVE/USN explanation page here

When using the CVE endpoint, the expected output is the following one:

```json
{
  "_schema_version": "v1",
  "data": {
    "attributes": {
      "cves_data": {
        "cves": [
          {
            "error": null,
            "expected_status": "EXPECTED_STATUS",
            "plan": [
              {
                "data": {
                  "binary_packages": [
                    "package"
                  ],
                  "source_packages": [
                    "package"
                  ]
                },
                "operation": "apt-upgrade",
                "order": 1
              }
            ],
            "title": "CVE-2017-9233",
            "warnings": []
          }
        ],
        "expected_status": "EXPECTED_STATUS"
      }
    },
    "meta": {
      "environment_vars": []
    },
    "type": "CVEFixPlan"
  },
  "errors": [],
  "result": "success",
  "version": "29",
  "warnings": []
}
``` 

> From this output, we can see that the **cves_data** object contain two attributes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this output, we can see that the **cves_data** object contains two attributes:
```

* **cves**: A list of CVE objects containing the plan for fixing each of them.
* **expected_status**: The expected status of the fix operation considering **all** CVEs.
                       This means that if one CVE cannot be fixed, this field will reflect that.

If we take a look at a CVE object, we will see the following structure:

> * **title**: The title of the CVE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **title**: The title of the CVE.
```

* **error**: Any error captured when creating the CVE plan will appear here. The error object
             will be detailed in a following section.
* **expected_status**: The expected status of the CVE if the plan was to be executed. There are
  three possible scenarios: **fixed**, **still-affected** and **not-affected**.
  The system is considered **still-affected** if there is something that

>   prevents any required packages to be upgraded. Additionally, the system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  prevents any required packages from being upgraded. Additionally, the system
```

>   prevents any required packages to be upgraded. Additionally, the system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  prevents any required packages to be upgraded. The system
```

>   is considered **not-affected**  if the CVE doesn't affect the system at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is considered **not-affected** if the CVE doesn't affect the system at all.
```

> * **plan**: The necessary plan that would need to be executed to fix the CVE. We will detail each
>   possible plan step on a following section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **plan**: The plan that would need to be executed to fix the CVE. We will detail each
  possible plan step in a following section.
```

* **warnings**: Warnings that can happen when generating the plan. For example, if the CVE doesn't
  have a fix available for a given package, this will be reflected here. We will detail the possible

>   warning in a following section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  warnings in a following section.
```

> ## What operations can appear in the plan array ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What operations can appear in the plan array?
```

> There are four distinct operations that can appear on the plan array. They are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are four distinct operations that can appear in the plan array. They are:
```

Reviewer: Also, what is a plan array?

Author: Good point, I have added a paragraph explaining what is the idea behind it.
Let me know if it is worth it providing a real case example as well

> * **APT Upgrade**: This operation details which package would need to be upgraded to fix the CVE.

Reviewer: Would it be possible to change these bolded bullet intros into sub-subheadings? It would be helpful to have them appear in the right-hand side navigation

> * **APT Upgrade**: This operation details which package would need to be upgraded to fix the CVE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **APT Upgrade**: This operation details which package (or packages) would need to be upgraded to fix the CVE.
```

>   The JSON representation for this step is the following one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The JSON representation for this step is:
```

  ```json
  {
    "data": {
      "binary_packages": ["binary_package"],
      "source_packages": ["source_package"]
    },
    "operation": "apt-upgrade",
    "order": 1
  }
  ``` 

>   This step provide all the binary and source packages on that data object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This step provides all the binary and source packages for that data object.
```

> * **Attach**: This operation details that the user will need to attach to a Pro subscription.

Reviewer: I think "informs" might be better than "details" here, but I'll let you decide.

Author: I agree that informs is better

>   The JSON representation for this step is the following one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The JSON representation for this step is:
```

  ```json
  {
    "data": {
      "reason": "required-pro-service"
    },
    "operation": "attach",
    "order": 1
  }
  ```

>   The reason field details why an attach is needed. This can be either because the user has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `reason` field details why an attach is needed. This can be either because the user has
```

  an expired subscription or the fix requires a specific Pro service to upgrade an affected
  package.

* **Enable**: This operation details that the user needs to enable a specific Pro service.

>   The JSON representation for this step is the following one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The JSON representation for this step is:
```

  ```json
  {
    "data": {
      "service": "esm-infra"
    },
    "operation": "enable",
    "order": 1
  }
  ```

>   The data object contains which service will need to be enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `data` object contains the name of the service that needs to be enabled.
```

> * **NoOp**: This indicates that no operation need to be performed to address the CVE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **NoOp**: This indicates that no operations need to be performed to address the CVE.
```

  The JSON representation for this step is the following one:

  ```json
  {
    "data": {
      "status": "system-not-affected"
    },
    "operation": "no-op",
    "order": 1
  }
  ```
  

>   The data object will state why no operation is needed. This can either be because the CVE doesn't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `data` object will state why no operation is needed. This can either be because the CVE doesn't
```

>   affect the system or because the CVE is already fixed in the machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  affect the system, or because the CVE is already fixed in the machine.
```

> ## What type of warnings can be generated ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What types of warnings can be generated?
```

Reviewer: Actually, on reflection, it might even be better to shorten it further, to just "What warnings can be generated?"

> There are two distinct warning that can happen when executing the plan API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two distinct warnings that can happen when executing the plan API:
```

> * **Package cannot be installed**: This happens when the endpoint identifies that a given package

Reviewer: As per my comment above, I think it'd be helpful to turn these bolded bits into sub-subheadings instead

  cannot be installed (i.e. the user lacks a required APT source in the machine). This can be seen
  in the following JSON representation:

  ```json
  {
    "data": {
      "binary_package": "binary_package",
      "binary_package_version": "3.5.12-1ubuntu7.16",
      "source_package": "source_package"
    },
    "order": 1,
    "warning_type": "package-cannot-be-installed"
  }
  ```

>  The data object details the packages that cannot be installed and the version of the package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The `data` object details the packages that cannot be installed, and the package versions.
```

Author: This should be singular, because it will always contain just one package. I will fix the setence

* **Security issue not fixed**: This happens when the CVE doesn't provide a fix for some of the
  affected packages. This can be seen in the following JSON representation:

  ```json
  {
    "data": {
      "source_packages": ["source_package"],
      "status": "needs-triage"
    },
    "order": 1,
    "warning_type": "security-issue-not-fixed"
  }
  ```

> ## What errors can be generated ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What errors can be generated?
```

> There are two errors that can occur when running this API endpoint. Those errors happen when a
> CVE has an invalid format or if it doesn't exist. When an error happen, it will
> be described by the following JSON representation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two errors that can occur when running this API endpoint. Those errors happen either when a
CVE has an invalid format, or if it doesn't exist. When an error happens, it will
be described by the following JSON representation:
```

```json
{
  "code": "security-fix-not-found-issue", 
  "msg": "Error: CVE-XXXX-XXXXX not found."
}
```

> ## Why do we need the order attribute ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why do we need the order attribute?
```

> The order attribute is used to allow the user to properly understand the exact sequence of events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order attribute is used to help the user to properly understand the exact sequence of events
```

> that will happen if the fix would actually be performed. This is specially true for situations where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that will happen when the fix is performed. This is specially true for situations where
```

> we have warnings, that sit outside the plan object.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean by "sit outside the plan object"?

Author: It is just that warning live in another attribute than the plan attribute. But let me know If I should be clearer here

> ## What about the USN endpoint ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What about the USN endpoint?
```

> The structure mentioned for CVEs work exactly the same for a USN. The only difference for the USN

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The structure, as described for CVEs, works in exactly the same way for a USN. The only difference for the USN
```

endpoint is how the USN object is represented. This can be seen here:

```json
{
  "usns": [
    {
      "related_usns_plan": [],
      "target_usn_plan": {}
    }
  ]
}
```

We can see that there is a distinction between the **target** USN and the **related** USNs.

> To better understand that distinction, please refer to this
> [explanation](cves_and_usns_explained.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To better understand that distinction, please refer to [our
explanation of CVEs and USNs](cves_and_usns_explained.md)
```

> To better understand that distinction, please refer to this
> [explanation](cves_and_usns_explained.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To better understand that distinction, please refer to this
[explanation](cves_and_usns_explained.md).
```

> # How to interpret the output of fix plan API endpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How to interpret the output of the fix plan API endpoint
```

In the Pro Client version 29, we introduce two distinct endpoints:

* `u.pro.security.fix.cve.plan.v1`
* `u.pro.security.fix.usn.plan.v1`

> These endpoints can be used to verify the needed steps for fixing a list of [CVEs/USNs](cves_and_usns_explained.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These endpoints can be used to verify the needed steps for fixing a list of [CVEs/USNs](cves_and_usns_explained.md).
```

If we take a look at a CVE object, we will see the following structure:

* **title**: The title of the CVE.
* **error**: Any error captured when creating the CVE plan will appear here. The error object
             will be detailed in a following section.
* **expected_status**: The expected status of the CVE if the plan was to be executed. There are
  three possible scenarios: **fixed**, **still-affected** and **not-affected**.
  The system is considered **still-affected** if there is something that
  prevents any required packages from being upgraded. The system
  is considered **not-affected** if the CVE doesn't affect the system at all.
* **plan**: The plan that would need to be executed to fix the CVE. We will detail each
  possible plan step in a following section.
* **warnings**: Warnings that can happen when generating the plan. For example, if the CVE doesn't
  have a fix available for a given package, this will be reflected here. We will detail the possible
  warnings in a following section.

## What operations can appear in the plan array?

The plan array details all of the necessary operations that need to take place

> to fix the CVE. Note that there are situations are a CVE cannot be fully fixed. If that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to fix the CVE. Note that there are some situations where a CVE cannot be fully fixed. If that
```

happens, the **warnings** fields will be populated with objects describing what prevents
the CVE from fully being fixed.

> Since the plan array is composed by operations, it is important to understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the plan array is composed of operations, it is important to understand
```

### Attach

This operation informs that the user will need to attach to a Pro subscription.
The JSON representation for this step is:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "reason": "required-pro-service"
  },
  "operation": "attach",
  "order": 1
}
```

The `reason` field details why an attach is needed. This can be either because the user has
an expired subscription or the fix requires a specific Pro service to upgrade an affected
package.

### Enable

This operation details that the user needs to enable a specific Pro service.
The JSON representation for this step is:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "service": "esm-infra"
  },
  "operation": "enable",
  "order": 1
}
```

The `data` object contains the name of the service that needs to be enabled.

### NoOp

This indicates that no operations need to be performed to address the CVE.
The JSON representation for this step is:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "status": "system-not-affected"
  },
  "operation": "no-op",
  "order": 1
}
```
  
The `data` object will state why no operation is needed. This can either be because the CVE doesn't
affect the system, or because the CVE is already fixed in the machine.

> ## What warnings can be generated ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What warnings can be generated?
```

```json
{
  "data": {
    "binary_package": "binary_package",
    "binary_package_version": "3.5.12-1ubuntu7.16",
    "source_package": "source_package"
  },
  "order": 1,
  "warning_type": "package-cannot-be-installed"
}
```

The `data` object details the package that cannot be installed and the package version.

### Security issue not fixed

This happens when the CVE doesn't provide a fix for some of the
affected packages. This can be seen in the following JSON representation:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "source_packages": ["source_package"],
    "status": "needs-triage"
  },
  "order": 1,
  "warning_type": "security-issue-not-fixed"
}
```

## What errors can be generated?

There are two errors that can occur when running this API endpoint. Those errors happen either
when a CVE has an invalid format, or if it doesn't exist. When an error happens, it will
be described by the following JSON representation:

```json
{
  "code": "security-fix-not-found-issue", 
  "msg": "Error: CVE-XXXX-XXXXX not found."
}
```

## Why do we need the order attribute?

The order attribute is used to help the user to properly understand the exact sequence of events

> that will happen when the fix is performed. This is specially true for situations where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that will happen when the fix is performed. This is particularly true for situations where
```

> we have warnings, that sit outside the plan object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we have warnings that are held outside the plan object.
```
